
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST/ SECOND SEMESTER 2016-2017
Course Handout Part II
										    Date: 01-08-2016 
In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.			:  ECONF418
Course Title			: Quantitative Analysis of International Trade
Instructor-in-Charge		: Dr. Archana Srivastava

Scope and Objective of the Course: This course pertains to applied empirical methods in international economics, with an intense emphasis on international trade and trade policy. Aptly devoted to study how economists use empirical techniques  econometrics, survey methods, input-output analysis, simulations, and applied general equilibrium analysis  to estimate relationships in international economics. Further, the course will provide a hands-on, practical introduction to applied trade work.  The course will discuss the theoretical and analytical literature on international trade before the discussion of empirical issues related to international trade.

Textbooks:
Feenstra, R.C. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton University Press, 2004.

Reference books
Feenstra R. C and Taylor. A.M. International Economics, Worth Publisher, 3rd ED. 2014.
Kenen, Peter B.The International Economy. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Vasudeva, P.K .World Trade Organization: Implications for Indian Economy, Pearson Education, 2005
Hertel, Thomas W., and Thomas Warren Hertel.Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge university press, 1997.
J. Borkakoti International Trade: Causes and Consequences: An Empirical and Theoretical Text, Macmillan Press Limited, 1998.
Markusen, Melvin, Kaempfer and Maskus. International Trade: Theory and Evidence, McGraw Hill, 1995.
Helpman and Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, 1985, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Raveendra Batra, Studies in Pure Theory of International Trade, 1973 Palgrave Macmillan.
Markusen, J(2002) Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade, Cambridge MIT Press.
Paul R. Krugman and Maurice Obstfeld, International Economics: Theory & Policy, Addison wesley, 6th Ed. 2003.




Course Plan:
Lecture No.
Learning objectives
Topics to be covered
Chapter in the Text Book
1
Global Trade and Empirical Facts of International Trade

Introduction
Notes 
2
Nature of the Globalization Process and Benefits and Costs associated with the Globalization Process, Globalization and Wages

Trade and Globalization
Notes
3
Theory and Empirical Testing of Trade Theories (From Mercantilism to Ricardian, Specific Factor Trade Models. 
Trade and Technology
Ch.2,3(R1)
4
Heckscher-Ohlin trade models ), testing of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model, Higher dimensional issues
Heckscher-Ohlin Models
Ch.2 (TB)
3
Alternative Trade Theories and their Empirical Tests: Linders Hypothesis, Technology Gap and Product Cycle theories 
 
Alternative Trade Models
Ch.3 (T.B) 
3
New Trade Theories by Krugman, Lanacaster and Falvey, New New Trade theories by Melitz, Strategic Trade Theories( Game theoretic Approach), 
Porters Model of Competitiveness, Gravity Models, Trade in intermediate products and services,  Grubel Lloyd indices.
New and New-New Trade Theories
Ch.5 (T.B)
5
Gains from Trade and the impact of trade on income distribution, trade patterns of developing countries and development issues, Stopler-Samuelson Theorem and Rybczynski Theorem
The Basis of International Trade
Ch. 3,4 (R. 8)
5
Instruments of Trade Policy and Welfare Effects: Tariffs, Quotas, Non Tariff Barriers, Voluntary Export Restraints; Protectionist arguments in case of external economies of scale, Nominal and Effective Rate of Protection, Optimum tariff, Lerner and Metzler Paradox
Tariffs and Quotas
Ch. 8,9 (R. 1)  
4
International Factor Movements including the impact and spillover effects of FDI and Portfolio Investments , Ownership, Locational and Internalization advantage Paradigm, Outward Flow of foreign investments, issues of international migration
Movement of Capital Between Countries
Ch. 5 (R.1)
5
Trade, Exchange Rate and Balance of Payments, Exchange rate management, different models of currency and banking crises and empirical assessment of BOP crises, international monetary theories and policies and macroeconomic management of an open economy, Impossible trilemma between fixed exchange rates, monetary policies and perfect capital mobility
The Balance of Payments and the Foreign-Exchange Market
Ch.12 (R.2)

4
Trade Policy simulations using software like GTAP and GAMS, International Trade Data Analysis using Econometric Models, introduction to WITS data base
Trade Policy Simulations
Ch.11 (R.4)

3
WTO negotiations and  Issues like TRIPS, GATS, trade and environment and labour standards, Dispute Settlement Process of the WTO, NAMA, among others
WTO and India
Ch.12 (R.3)






Evaluation Scheme:
Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date & Time
Nature of Component
Test  I
1hr
20
8/9, 2.30--3.30PM
CB
Test  II
1 hr
20
25/10, 2.30--3.30PM
OB
Projects/Assignments/Quizes

20


Comprehensive Exam.
3 hrs.
40
06/12 AN
(CB)

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

Notices: All notices pertaining to this course shall be displayed on the Economics and Finance (or) LTC Notice Board.

Make-up Policy: Make-up will be granted on genuine reason with prior permission.

    

 INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE
ECON F418














