BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017 COURSE HANDOUT (PART-II)
Date: 13/05/2016

In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable), this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course Code

: ME F313

Name of the Course

: Production Techniques-II

Instructor-In-Charge

: AMRITA PRIYADARSHINI

Instructors (L, P, T)): Amrita Priyadarshini, C Kiran Sagar, Khalid Anwar

I. Scope and Objective of the Course This course is designed to enrich theoretical, analytical as well as practical knowledge about common production techniques used in machining. Methods of selection of proper production techniques, CAM and micro manufacturing technologies are also included.

II. Textbook 1. B. L. Juneja, G.S.Sekhon, Nitin Seth, "Fundamentals of Metal Cutting and Machine Tools, New Age
International, 2005, New Delhi. 2. Amitabha Ghosh and Asok Kumar Mallik, "Manufacturing Science", Affiliated East-West Press,
New Delhi, 1985.

III. Reference Books
1. Geoffrey Boothroyd, Fundamentals of metal machining and machine tools, TMH, New Delhi, 2007.. 2. Serope Kalpakjian and Steven R. Schmid, "Manufacturing Engineering and Technology," Pearson
Education (Low Cost Indian Edition), 4/e, 2001, New Delhi. 3. Roy A. Lindberg, "Processes and Materials of Manufacture," PHI, New Delhi, 2004. 4. P. N. Rao, "Manufacturing Technology: Metal Cutting & Machine Tools," TMH, New Delhi, 2000.

IV. Course Contents

Topic

Learning Objectives

Metal cutting theory Analysis
Economics
Quality control of metal cutting

A brief overview of different metal cutting processes
Analysis of mechanics of metal cutting in turning, milling and drilling, cutting force calculation, power estimation, cutting temperature calculation, Lee-Shafer theory, Ernest-Merchant theory, chip separation, tool life, Machining with controlled contact tools Costs of single pass turning operation, optimum cutting speed for maximum profit rate in turning, restrictions on optimum cutting speed
Introduction, aims of inspection, scope

Number of Lectures
2
8
3 1

Source T1 & T2
T1 & T2
T1 & T2 T1 & T2

Topic
Laboratory exercises in metal cutting Different machine tools; their description and operation
Non-traditional machining processes Micromanufacturing technologies Introduction to computer aided manufacturing (CAM) CNC machines
CNC part programming

Learning Objectives Tool wear, surface finish, key way production

Number of Lectures

Source

2 T1& T2

Milling, drilling, Shaping, Abrasive machining processes

Introduction, Ultrasonic Machining, Abrasive Jet Machining, EDM, ECM, LBM, EBM, ECG and Chemical Machining

Introduction, lithography

Chemistry-based,

Electron-beam

Introduction, developments in conventional machine tools, CIM, FMS, Modern developments in machine tools
NC and CNC Machines, Operation of NC/CNC, Definition of terms often used in numerical control, Positional control Introduction, Programming for NC/CNC Machining, Some commonly used G codes
Total

7
6 2
3
2 6 42

T1 & T2 T2 T2 T2 R3 R4

V. Evaluation Scheme and Schedule

EC Component No. 1 Test I
2 Test II

Duration
60 min 60 min

3 Class Room Assignments

4 Practical & Fabrication

Project

5 Comprehensive exam

3 hours

Weightage (%) 20 20 5
15 (5+10)
40

Date, time, venue

Nature
CB CB OB OB
CB

VI. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class. VII. Notices concerning the course: All notices concerning the course will be displayed on the CMS. VIII. Make-up Policy: Make-up will be permitted only in genuine cases with prior permission. NOTE: The border cases in final grading will be decided based on mainly class room attendance and attentiveness in the classroom.
Instructor-In-Charge ME F313

