
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2015-2016
Course Handout Part II
										    Date: 20.7.2016 
In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.			:  GS F 231
Course Title			:  Dynamics of Social Change
Instructor-in-Charge		:  Srinivas Sajja ( HYPERLINK "mailto:srinivassajja@hyderabad.bits-pilani.ac.in" srinivassajja@hyderabad.bits-pilani.ac.in) Chamber No. C 212
Class hour and Room		:  5th Hour; G 104; M W F

Scope and Objective of the Course:
The objective of the course is to enable students to have an insight into Social processes, Sociological thought, Methodology, Sociological institutions like Family, Religion, Education, Culture and recent trends in modernization. Sociological study aids in comprehending one's identity, thinking, and action. It makes one more tolerant of social change and human differences. 

Textbooks:
Abraham, Francis M. 2015 (2nd edition). Contemporary Sociology: An Introduction to Concepts and Theories, New Delhi: OUP

Reference books
Das, Veena, ed. 2011. Handbook of Indian Sociology. New Delhi: OUP
Scott, John (4th edition). 2015. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. New Delhi: OUP.
Course Plan:
Lecture No.
Learning objectives
Topics to be covered
Chapter in the Text Book
1-5
To prepare the way for the study of the foundations and roots of sociology and development of the discipline through an introduction to founding fathers of Sociology
Sociology   and its  relation with  other  social  sciences, Pioneers of Sociology  Comte, Marx, Spencer, Durkheim and Weber 
1
6-8
To acquaint students with the various methods of carrying out Research by exposing them to Principles of Research Methodology
Scientific Approach; Steps in the Research Process; research design, collection and analysis of data; Methods of Research, surveys
3

9-11

To give a general idea of the basic theoretical perspectives in Sociology which would provide a background for the understanding of society 
Types of Sociological theory; Mainline theories in Sociology; Choosing and using theory; theoretical perspectives in a global age.

2
12-20
To comprehend the meaning of our tradition and culture, socialization and finally how it leads to the development of various types of Societies and groups
Culture, Social Norms, folkways,   Mores, Cultural Diversity; Cultural Change; Socialization; Peer Groups, Mass Media; Evolution of Societies, three typologies, types of social groups, Social Organization, Deviance and Social Control 
4,5,6,7,8

21-23
To acquaint the students with the stratification pattern in general and Indian society in particular, with focus on its changing dimensions.
Social    stratifications: Estate System, Caste System, Theories, Caste and Class in India, Social Mobility; Women, Dalits, Tribes and OBCs in India
9,10

24-32
To give a general idea of various Social Institutions in the societyFamily, Education, Political Economy and Religion and how they shape functioning of Society
The family; Marriage and family in India; State and Government, Types of States; Types of Economy; Theories of Power, Functions of Education, Education in India; Elements of Religion, Theories, recent trends, Religion in India
11, 12, 13,14 

33-35
To give a general idea of basic concepts on Population and Urbanization and how they impact social change
Theories of Population, Demographic Transition, Population in India; Urbanization
15
36-38
To provide an understanding of the role of Social Movements and how collective behavior leads to these movements and social change
Theories of Collective Behavior; Forms of Collective Behavior; Social Movements
16
39-42
To know about the modern dynamics of social change both in the context of urban and rural societies.
Theories of Social Change; Social Change in India; Environment and Sustainable Development 
17

42L
Evaluation Scheme:
Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date & Time
Nature of Component
Test I
60 min.
20
8/9; 8.30-9.30
Open Book
Test II	
60 min.
20
25/10; 8.30-9.30
Open Book
Assignments + Write up

10+10
Assignment + Write up
Open Book
Comprehensive Exam
180 min.
40
12/12  A.N.
Open Book

Chamber Consultation Hour: 16.00-17.00 hrs on Monday.
Course Notices: Notices, if any, will be displayed on the HSS Notice Board and CMS Website.
Makeup: The make-up for an evaluation component will be given only in genuine cases. In health related issues student has to bring a letter from warden as per the latest SWD guidelines.
Pull ups would be considered for students who attend classes regularly and take active part in class discussion.


 INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE














