BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS, INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 201617
Course Handout (Part II)
                                                                                  Date:01/08/2016   
In addition to Part I (General Handout) for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.
Course No            	: CHE F266
Course Title         	: Study Oriented Project
Instructorincharge   : Dr. Ramesh Adusumalli
1.   Scope and Objective of the course: 
The course is specially designed to provide an opportunity to the students for development of their academic skills and logical thinking through open ended study oriented activities. As a part of education, this project course follows a method of learning and therefore, the student's actual day-to-day task involvement would constitute the central thread of the learning process. The evaluation will recognize this aspect by demanding day-to-day productivity and punctuality of the student.
2.   Plan of Work: 
The plan of work for each student will be decided by the respective Instructors. Each student should adhere to the plan of work decided for and should regularly monitor the progress of the project accordingly.
3.   Evaluation Scheme:
S.No.
Components
Weightage %
Due Date
1.
Project Outline & Plan of Work
5
10/08/2016
2.
Weekly Seminar  / Viva / Interactions
10
As per instructor schedule
3.
Mid-Sem Report
10
03/10/2016
4.
Mid-Sem Seminar
25
 (not later than 07/10/2016)
5.
Weekly Interactions and Diary
10
As per instructor schedule
6.
Final Report
15
10/11/2016 
7.
Final Seminar and Viva
25
As per instructor schedule(not later than 17/11/2016)
* The date of individual seminar will be informed by your instructor 
4.   Midsemester grading: 
Midsemester grading will be done after midsemester seminar.

5.   Grading Procedure:
In addition to what is mentioned in Part I of the handout, the grading  will be done mainly  on  the basis of the progress made towards attainment of the  project objectives  and  will  recognize that each Instructor has given  specific task situation  in which the student participates in a cognitive manner. Only reports with less than 30% similarity index (given by TURNITIN) will be accepted for the evaluation. Dont upload the report with references.  Each Instructor will recommend a grade for his student for the consideration of the Instructorincharge. Final grading will be fixed by IC after consultations with the respective instructor.

6. General:
It is the student's responsibility to ensure:
Continuous interaction with the Instructor.
Use the SCOPUS and SCIFINDER (ACS) databases for getting research articles. Approach library for more information.
Work to the satisfaction of the Instructor.
Adherence to plan of work.
Evaluation(s) to be completed by the due date and evaluation marks are communicated to the Instructorin charge by due date.
It is student responsibility to generate turnitin reports for midterm and final reports.
7. Notices: 
All notices pertaining to this course will be put up on the CMS.

8. Project Report	
The project report shall be submitted to your Instructor. The reports will be checked by the instructor using Turnitin software. A soft copy of the midsem and final report is to be submitted to the Instructor in-charge but not to Instruction Division or Project in-charge.


Ramesh Babu Adusumalli
InstructorInCharge
CHE F266






 

 



