BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
INSTRUCTION DIVISION, FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017
Course Handout (Part II)
                                       Date: 12/5/2016    
In addition to partI (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.                  	:   CHE F311
Course Title                 	:    Kinetics and Reactor Design
Instructorincharge    	:    Balaji Krishnamurthy

Course Description: 
Kinetics of homogeneous, heterogeneous reactions; ideal reactors, non-ideal flow; selectivity; analysis and design of chemical reactors.

Scope and Objective of the course:
This course is an introduction to the chemical reaction kinetics, design and performance of various types of chemical reactors for chemically reacting systems which yield industrially important products. The emphasis in this course will be to understand the fundamentals of kinetics of homogeneous reactions, design and analysis of ideal reactors; and non-ideal flow. 
Text Book:  
		 Scott Fogler, H. Scott Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, Pearson Edu, 4th Ed, 2006.
		 Octave Levenspiel, Chemical Reaction Engineering. 3rd Ed

Reference Books:
		Schmidt Lanny D., The Engineering of Chemical Reactions, Oxford University Press, 2nd Ed., 2005.

Course Plan:

Lec.
Learning Objectives
Topics to be covered

L1-L3
Introduction
Scope and objectives of the course, methodology, concept of mole balances
TB -1&2
L4-L7
Kinetics of reactions
Different types of reactors, mole balances
TB -1&2
L8-L12
Batch reactors
Conversion and reactor sizing
TB -1&2
L13-L18
CSTR and PFR reactors
Equations governing conversions
TB -1&2
L-19-L23
Multiple reactor systems
Reactors in series and parallel
TB -1&2
L-24-L28
Multiple reactions
Reactions of various orders
TB -1&2
L29-L35
Solid catalyzed reactions
Pore diffusion factors fitting first and second order Catalyst deactivation
TB -1&2
L36-L42
Basics of non-ideal reactor

Non ideal behavior

TB -1&2




Evaluation Schedule:
Component
Duration (Minutes)
Weightage 
Date & Time
Remarks
Test-1
1hr 
25%

CB
Test-2
1hr
25%

OB
Surprise/quiz tests*
-
10%

CB
Comprehensive Exam.
3hr
40%

CB/OB

Closed Book Test: No reference material of any kind will be permitted inside the exam hall.

Open Book Exam: Use of any printed / written reference material (books and notebooks) will be permitted inside the exam hall. Loose sheets of paper will not be permitted. Computers/mobile of any kind will not be allowed inside the exam hall. Use of calculators will be allowed in all exams. No exchange of any material will be allowed.

Number and Sequence of lecture may be changed depending on the situation/requirements.
Quiz/ surprise test will be conduct for 2 times and average of the marks will be taken as final.

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

Notices: All notices concerning this course will be displayed on the Notice Board of Chemical Engineering or CMS 

Make-up Policy: Make-up for the test (test-1 and test-2) may be granted only with prior permission and valid justification from the Instructor-in-charge. No makeup for the quiz/surprise tests will be granted.
	
                                     							 		
Instructorincharge
						             				Kinetics and Reactor Design
