BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FirstSemester : 2016-17
Course Handout (PartII)
Date: 1/08/2016
In addition to partI (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.
Course No.    		 : HSS F 339
Course Title		 : THEATRE ART ACTING & PRODUCTION 
Instructorincharge		 : M.G.PRASUNA 
Course Instructor                    :  PranavaSinghal
1. Scope and Objective of the Course:
The objective of the course is to familiarize students with the nature of understanding Theatre, Theatre Production and Acting Techniques.This course introduces students to the study of theatre from across the world.It will also study the influences on dramatic literature and aesthetics, with emphasis on English and Indian language schools.  Students will be introduced to the different functions in the production of a play, to divergent theatrical styles, and also introduce students to the techniques of voice training and Modulation, Posture, Body Language, Movement, Expression and Audience Impact.
2. Reference Books:
1. Encyclopedia of Acting Techniques; Author John Perry; Publisher:Betterway Books;  (March 1997)
2.Actor at Work 10th Edition ;Author  Robert Benedetti Publisher  Allyn & Bacon,2008
3. The Actor's Art; A Practical Treatise on Stage Declamation, Public Speakingand Deportment, for the Use of Artists, Students and Amateurs;Author  Gustave Garcia;Publisher Rarebooksclub.com; 2012
4. How Plays Work: Reading and Performance; Author  Martin Meisel;Publisher  Oxford University Press, USA;Publication Year  2007
5. The Theory of the Modern Stage from Artaud to Zola : An Introduction toModern Theatre and DramaEdited By  Eric Bentley;Publisher  Penguin;Imprint  Penguin Modern Classics; 2009
6. The Complete Handbook of Play Production; Author    Carl Allensworth;Publisher:Harper & Row; Revised edition (1982)
7. The Handbook of Stage Lighting;Author: Neil Fraser, Simon Bennison;Publisher: Crowood Press (uk) (2007)
8. The Empty Space;Author Peter Brook;Publisher  Penguin; 2008
9. The Theatre: A Concise History;Author  Phyllis Hartnoll; Publisher Thames & Hudson; 2012
Encyclopedias :
1. The Oxford Guide to Indian Theatre
2. The Cambridge Guide to Theatre
3The Cambridge History of American Theatre
Drama Texts :As assigned in class
Various Internet Resources  :As indicated in clas

4.Course Plan:
Lecture No.      
Learning Objectives 
Topics to be covered 
1 -2
Introduction to Theatre

Introductions to theatre.  Components of theatre:Medium of Theatre vs Film
3-4
History of Theatre 
Theatre in primitivesocieties
Greek theatre Roman theatre

In other parts of the Old World

5
History of Theatre 
Development of theatre in Asia. Evolution in India Modern Indian theatre form



6-7
Evolution of English Theatre
Medieval, Shakespearian, Edwardian, Victorian, Modern, Theatre in the US; in other parts of the world
8
Influences on Theatre 
Historical; Cultural; Political; Economic.
     9
Selecting a Play
Time and Age in which the play is set; current relevance; target audience ; set; production values; other works by the playwright
10-12
Study of Stage 
Components; Nomenclature; Usage.
13- 16
Performing Spaces
Different types of Performing Spaces; advantages and disadvantages; difference in actors technique
  17-19            
Theatre Genres


Theatrical Styles
Drama (Tragedy,Epic,Melodrama),
Comedy ( High,Low,Farce)
Realism, Fantasy, Expressionism,Absurd,Post-Modernist
   20-22
Voice
Modulation; emoting; impact; breathing exercises; voice exercises
   23-25
Body,Movement ,  and Stage Blocking
Posture; use of feet; use of hands; facial expressions; focus of attention.
Types; pros & cons; basics of blocking; movement on stage
26-27
Performing Comedy
Special techniques in Voice &  Movement for maximizing comic impact.
28 - 29
Characterization and the Psychology of Acting
Understanding the psyche of the character; getting into character; in relation to others; in relation to the audience.
30 - 31
Performing Shakespeare 
Understanding, appreciating and performing Shakespeare
32
Audio Equipment- Overview
 Types of equipment; benefits of each type; positioning of microphones; positioning of speakers.
   33
Lighting Equipment-Overview
Types and benefits; suitability and appropriateness; creative use of lights
34 - 35
Set Design & Construction
Understanding various types  of set design( Realistic, Expressimist,Minimalist etc), and basic set construction and execution.
36
Field Visit to Auditorium
Practical understanding of stage spaces, stage components and Technical equipment. 
   37 - 38
Production Values
Unity of Production Design
Unity of Genre and style in Set design, Props; costumes; make up;. Lighting; sound 
    39 - 40
Common Mistakes
Types of errors.  Handling these shortcomings.
   41 - 42
Performing
In front of audience/camera.  Overcoming self consciousness and Stage Fright ;  and Stage Presence;








Note : 1.Practical Instruction covered in Learning Objectives for Lectures 10  16, 20  31 and 39 - 42 will actually commence from Lecture 1, as a parallel integral part of every Lecture. 

5.  Home Assignments:
PROJECTS				To be announced in the class
 6.   Evaluation Schedule :
T1 : (20%) 40 marks ( Individual performance on  Posture, Voice, expression, emphasis) 
T2 :(20%) 40 marks ( Individual performance on  Posture, Voice, modulation , emphasis plus Movement, Blocking, Use of stage space )
Home  Assignments :  (20%) 40 marks
Comprehensive : (40%) 80 marks (40 marks :written Exam on Production Theory: Directing and  Producing a specified  play);  40 marks : Practical individual performance)
7.   Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class. 
8.   Notices: Notices will be displayed on the Notice Board of Humanities & Social Sciences only. Assignments/ Additional resource material will be posted online. 
  Instructorincharge
						HSS F 339



