
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017
Course Handout Part II
										    Date: 18-07-2016 
In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.			:  MATH F214
Course Title            	  	:  Elementary Real Analysis 
Instructor in charge    	:  MANISH KUMAR
Instructor		  	:  Manish Kumar

Scope and Objective of the Course:
The objective of this course is to train the students with the basic tools of modern mathematical analysis, train them in art of logical, deductive & constructive thinking and thus equip them with enough back ground for   courses which involve deeper mathematical analysis. Real analysis is needed in several science & engineering disciplines, in study of dynamical systems, which are solutions of differential equations, theoretical study of differential equations, concept of fractal & fractal dimension is usually studied in metric spaces.  Riemann integral is basic integral on which advance theory of integration is developed. Integration theory is needed in study of theoretical & numerical solution of partial differential equations. 


Textbooks:
W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, McGraw, Hill 3rd edition, 1976.                                           

Reference books
Apostal: Mathematical Analysis, Addision Wesley, 1983.
John M Howie: Real Analysis, Springer Verlag, 2000.
Kenneth Ross:  Elementary Analysis, Springer international edition, 2000.

Course Plan:

Lecture No.
Learning objectives
Topics to be covered
Chapter in the Text Book
1-5
Representation of real numbers 
Ordered field, Construction of real numbers, the set of real numbers as ordered field, extended real numbers
Chapter 1, Sec : 1.1  to 1.23
6-8
Difference between countable
& uncountable set
Finite, Countable  & uncountable sets
Chapter 2, Sec : 2.1  to 2.14
9-15
Generalization of concept of  distance to abstract sets
Metric spaces, compact sets, different 
Definition of compact sets, Cantor Intersection theorem, Contraction Principle
Chapter 2, Sec : 2.15  to 2.47
16-21
Generalization of concept of  limit & continuity  to metric spaces
Continuous & uniformly continuous functions& their properties
Chapter 4
22-29
Integration with respect to a function
Riemann  Stieltjes integral & properties
Chapter 6
30-37
Distinguish between uniform & point wise convergence of sequence of functions. Functions not differentiable but continuous
Point & uniform convergence of functions & related properties of Integrability & differentiability
Chapter 7
38-42
How continuity & differentiability have generalization for function of several variables
Linear Transformations, Differentiation of functions of several variables
Chapter 9  sec: 9.1 to 9.15


Evaluation Scheme:

Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date & Time
Nature of Component
Test I
60 min.
30%
---------------------------
Closed Book
Test II
60 min.
30%
---------------------------
Open Book
Comprehensive Exam
180 min.
40%
---------------------------
Closed Book

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class. 

Notices: Notices concerning this course will be displayed on the LTC Notice Board only

Make-up Policy: Prior permission is needed for makeup; makeup will be given only for genuine cases. 

 
	
 INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE
MATH F214














