BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI HYDERABAD CAMPUS INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017 Course Handout (Part -II)
Date: 05/05/2016
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.
Course No. : CE F311 Course Title: Design of Concrete Structures Instructor-in-charge: Dr. Arkamitra Kar Instructors : TBA
Scope & Objective of the Course
The course intends to impart adequate analysis and design skills pertinent to Civil Engineering Reinforced Concrete (RC) Structures as commonly found in practice, using the Limit State design method; however, an introduction will be given to working stress design method also. In addition to analysis and design of beams, slabs, columns this course will include the design of various staircase and foundations. Before going into the details of the design procedures, the course will provide the students with an introduction to concrete materials including cement, aggregates, and reinforcing steels. At the end of this course the students will be able to design the simple common reinforced concrete structures.
Text Book (TB)
J. N. Bandhopadhyay, "Design of Concrete Structures", 2008, Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi
Reference Books (RB)
1. IS 456:2000 "Code of practice for Plain and Reinforced concrete", Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi.
2. Special Publication (SP)-16, Design aids for reinforced concrete to IS 456:1978, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi.
3. P. C. Verghese, "Limit State Design of Concrete", 2nd edition, PHI Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2011.
4. S.U.Pillai and Devdas Menon, "Reinforced Concrete Design", 3rd Edition, TMH, New Delhi, 2009.
5. Jain, A.K., Reinforced Concrete: Limit State Design", 6th Edition, Nemchand & Bros, Roorkee, 2002.
1

Course Plan

Serial No. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6.
7.

Learning Objective

Topics Covered

Objectives & Methods
of Analysis & Design

Introduction,

objectives,

Methods of Design, Loads &

Forces acting on structures

Properties of Concrete
Philosophies of Limit State Method
Limit State of Collapse-Flexure
and Singly reinforced Rectangular beam
Analysis & Design of Doubly Reinforced
rectangular section Beams
Analysis & Design of Simply
supported Flanged Sections
Design for Bond, anchorage and development length

Stress-strain curve for concrete, Size effect, behavior of concrete in tension, Durability of concrete, properties of Steel, Stressstrain curve for steel A review on various design Philosophies, Types of Limit States, partial safety factors for materials and loads Assumptions in Limit State Design, Analysis of singly reinforced rectangular, Design of Singly Reinforced Concrete Beam, Analysis of singly reinforced rectangular beams using SP-16 tables and Charts.
Assumptions and basic principles, analysis and design of doubly reinforced concrete beams with Rectangular section
Effective Width, Analysis of Flanged sections for various cases, Design of simply supported Flanged beam Sections, Design of continuous beam Flanged sections Design bond strength, development length, check for development length in tension, Anchoring of reinforcing bars, bearing stress at bonds, reinforcement splicing, Design for bond, Development length, Curtailment of reinforcement, Lap splice

Lecture No. 1-2 3-4 5-6 7-11
12 - 14 15 - 18
19 -22

Reference to TB
Ch 1 Ch 2
Ch 3 Ch 4
Ch 5 Ch 6
Ch 8

2

Modes of failure due to shear,

shear strength of concrete,

critical section for shear,

8.

Design of Beams for Shear

enhanced shear strength near support, minimum shear reinforcement, Design of shear

23 - 26

strength, check for shear at

point of tension reinforcement

curtailment

9.

Limit state of serviceability

short term deflection calculation for beams, deflection due to shrinkage and creep

27 - 28

10.

Design of beams for Torsion

Design of beams for combined bending, shear and torsion as per IS 456

29 - 30

Design shear strength of

concrete in slabs, design

consideration for slabs, design

11.

Design of one way and reinforcement detailing of and two way Slabs one way simply supported and

31 - 36

continuous slabs, design and

reinforcement detailing of two

way slabs

Types of stair cases,

components of staircase,

12.

Design of Stair Cases

structural system of stair cases, effective span, Design of stair

37 - 40

cases spanning transversely and

longitudinally

Classification of columns based

on slenderness ratio,

13.

Design of Compression
Members

reinforcement & loading, Design of rectangular and circular columns subjected to Axial load, (Axial load + uni-

41 - 43

axial bending) and (Axial load

+ Bi-axial bending)

Ch 7 Ch 9 Ch 8 Ch 10
Ch 11
Ch 12

3

Evaluation Scheme

Ec. No.
1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Evaluation component Duration Weightage

Test I
Test II
Project/Assignments Lab record and lab quiz Pop quizzes/surprise
tests Compre. Exam

1 hr.
1 hr. -
15 mins 3 hrs.

10%
10% 25% 15% 10% 30%

Date, time

Nature of component
CB
CB OB
CB, open
notes CB

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class. Notices: All Notice concerning to the course will be displayed on Notice Board of Civil Engg. Department. Make up policy: Makeup will be given only to the genuine cases with prior permission.

Instructor-in-charge CE F311

4

