BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI HYDERABAD CAMPUS INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017

Course Handout Part II

Date : In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.

: EEE F313/ INSTR F313

Course Title

: ANALOG AND DIGITAL VLSI DESIGN

Instructor-in-charge

: Chetan Kumar V

Instructors

: Sumit Kumar Chatterjee, Chetan Kumar V

1. Scope and Objective of the Course:
The objective of this course is to provide to the student an introduction to the fundamentals and practical considerations pertaining to the design of integrated circuits. The scope encompasses both analog and digital integrated circuits. The importance of CAD tools in IC system design process is also acknowledged and stressed upon.

2. Course Description: Moore's Law, Y chart, MOS device models including Deep Sub-Micron effects; an overview of fabrication of CMOS circuits, parasitic capacitances, MOS scaling techniques, latch up, matching issues, common centroid geometries in layout. Digital circuit design styles for logic, arithmetic and sequential blocks design; device sizing using logical effort; timing issues (clock skew and jitter) and clock distribution techniques; estimation and minimization of energy consumption; Power delay trade-off, interconnect modelling; memory architectures, memory circuits design, sense amplifiers; an overview of testing of integrated circuits. Basic and cascaded NMOS/PMOS/CMOS gain stages, Differential amplifier and advanced OPAMP design , matching of devices, mismatch analysis, CMRR, PSRR and slew rate issues, offset voltage , advanced current mirrors; current and voltage references design, common mode feedback circuits, Frequency response, stability and noise issues in amplifiers; frequency compensation techniques.

3. Text Book :
T1: Jan M. Rabaey; Anantha Chandrakasan; Borivoje Nikolic, "Digital Integrated Circuits - A Design Perspective", (Second Edition) Prentice-Hall Electronics and VLSI Series. (2003).

T2: Behzad Razavi,"Design of Analog CMOS integrated circuits", McGraw Hill International Edition. 2001.

4. Prime Reference Books R1: Neil H.E. Weste, David Harris, Ayan Banerjee, "CMOS VLSI Design", 3rd Edition Pearson Education.

Other Reference Books: Ra) Kang. S.M and Leblebici Y., "CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits: Analysis and Design, McGraw Hill International Editions 3rd Edition 2003. Rb) Pucknell D.A., Eshraghian K.,"Basic VLSI design, systems and circuits", Third edition, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. Rc) Fabricius E.D., "Introduction to VLSI design", McGraw Hill international editions. Rd) Gregorian R., Temes G.C.,"Analog Mos integrated circuits for signal processing", Wiley interscience publication. Re) Sze S.M.,"VLSI Technology", Second edition, McGraw Hill International Edition. Rf) IEEE Journals of solid state circuits, VLSI system. Rg) Martin. Ken, "Digital Integrated Circuit Design", Oxford University Press, Inc. Rh) Johns. David A. and Martin K, "Analog Integrated Circuit Design," John Wily & Sons. Inc. 2002. Ri) Michael. L. Bushnell and Vishwani. D. Agrawal, "Essentials Of Electronic Testing For Digital, Memory And Mixed Signal VLSI Circuits. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Third Edition, 2004

5. Notices: All assignments and notices will be announced in class, put up on the CMS

6. Course Plan :

No of Topic To be Covered

Learning Objectives

Lec.

Common Topics

2 1. Introduction to VLSI Moore's Law, Y chart, Quality Metrics of Digital

Design Methodologies Design. Design flow

5 2. CMOS Technology, MOS device models including Deep Sub-Micron

Design Rules, MOS effects; parasitic capacitances, MOS scaling

Capacitances, Scaling techniques, latch up, matching issues, Introduction to

layouts and Industry design flow for analog and

digital integrated circuits, An overview of fabrication

of CMOS circuits. interconnect modelling;

Digital Design I:

6 3. MOS inverter- Static and Digital circuit design styles for logic, Combinational switching characteristics, blocks design. Device sizing using logical effort; Combinational MOS logic circuits -Static logic

Ref. to Text Book
Chapter-1 (T1) /Chapter-1 (R1) Chapter-2,3,4 (T1) /Chapter-2,3,(4.5) (R1) + Class Notes
Chapter-5,6 (T1)
/Chapter-4,6 (R1) + Class Notes

5 4. Synchronous system and Synchronous design, timing metrics, Design of flip- Chapter-7,10

Sequential circuits design flops, Timing issues (clock skew and jitter) and clock (T1)

distribution techniques;

/Chapter-7 (R1)

+ Class Notes

Analog Design

6 5. Advanced

Current Basic and cascaded NMOS /PMOS /CMOS gain Chapter-3,4.5

Sources & sinks; Current stages. Advanced current mirrors; current and voltage (T2)

Reference circuit,

references design.

+ Class Notes

6

6. Operational amplifier

Differential amplifier and advanced OPAMP design, Chapter-8,9 (T2)

architectures and

matching of devices, mismatch analysis, common + Class Notes

Feedback circuits.

mode feedback circuits

5 7. Frequency Compensation Frequency Response stability and noise issues in Chapter-7,

and Noise

amplifiers; frequency compensation techniques.

10(T2) + Class

Notes

Digital Design II:

4 8. Memory Circuits Design Design of SRAM, DRAM, decoders, sense Chapter-12 (T1)

amplifiers

/Chapter - 9 (R1)

+ Class Notes

2 9. Power and energy

Estimation and minimization of energy consumption; Chapter- 4 (T1)

Power delay trade-off.

/Chapter-4 (R1) +

Class Notes

3 10. Design verification & test Verification of functionality, manufacturing defects. Chapter-12 (R1)

+ Class Notes

7. Evaluation Scheme : Component
Test I Test II Comp. Exam Assignments

Duration
60 Mts. 60 Mts. 3 Hours Continuous

Weightage
25% 25% 40% 10%

Date & Time
9/9 & 10:00-11:00AM 24/10 & 10:00-11:00AM
03/12 AN

Remarks
CB OB CB OB

8. Make up Policy: Make up will be given only on genuine reasons. Applications for makeup should be given in advance and prior permission should be obtained for Scheduled tests.

9. Chamber Consultation Hours : To be announced in class

Instructor-In-Charge EEE F313/ INSTR F313

