
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI

INSTRUCTION DIVISION

SEMESTER I: 2016-2017

Course Handout Part II

Date: 01/08/2016

In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.	: ECON F412/FIN F313

Course Title	: Security Analysis & Portfolio Management
Instructor-in-charge       :  Nagaraju Thota 

1. Scope & Objective: Introducing students to the World of Investments.

The objective and focus of the course is to give an insight into evaluation and analysis of a wide range of financial securities and thereby developing techniques for designing an optimal portfolio. The main emphasis of the course is to impart an understanding of the methods and techniques of Risk Quantification, Security Valuation, Fundamental Analysis, and Technical Analysis required for security selection for designing an optimal portfolio.

After completing this course the students shall be able to:

A/ Appreciate and apply the concepts of Investment analysis in theory as well as in a real-life situation.
B/ Identify numerous investments related risks that an investor is subject to while investing in financial securities.
C/ Differentiate between various classes of financial securities such as Equities, Fixed Income Securities, and Derivatives and learn various techniques to value and analyze these securities.
D/ Carry out Fundamental Analysis (that involves Economy Analysis, Industry Analysis and Company Analysis) to study the intrinsic strength of a firm and make investment decisions based on the study.

E/ Analyze and interpret various technical charts related to stock price movements and predict future price movements to comment on Buy/Sell/Hold decisions.
F/ Understand the mechanics of Derivatives trading and develop various strategies for hedging or speculation using derivatives.
G/ Comprehend the news items appearing in the financial dailies.

2. Text book (TB):

1.	Reilly Frank K and Keith C. Brown, Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management, 8th edition Thomson Learning, 2007.

		Reference books (R): 

1.  Zvi Bodie, Alex Kane, Alan Marcus, Pitabas Mohanty, Investments, 2010, McGraw Hill. 

		Prasanna Chandra - Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management, 3RD edition, 2009, TMH. 

		D.E. Fisher and R.J. Jordan - Security Analysis and Portfolio Management, Prentice-Hall/Pearson Edu., 6th Edition, 1995 

		J. fuller & James L. Farell  Modern Investment & Security analysis - McGraw Hill, International Ed. 
		J.C. Francis, Investments: Analysis and management, 5th Ed., 1991, McGraw Hill, Singapore 
		M.Ranganatham & R. Madhumathi: Investment Analysis & Portfolio Management, Pearson Education. 

		Comprehensive Course Plan: 

Lecture
Learning Objectives
Topics to be covered

No.


Ref.




1-4
Exposure to investment
Introduction to Investments. Risk and return,


climate, Risk and return.
investor life cycle, securities and its various
 Ch 1-5 TB


types, global security markets. Organization and



functioning of security markets, indexes and



their calculations, Types of orders, trading



mechanism, common stock exchange problems,



margin trading,





5-20
Modern portfolio theory
Markowitz model, Sharpes Single Index model,
Ch 6-9 TB


Capital Asset Pricing model, Arbitrage pricing,



Portfolio performance evaluation





21-30
Exposure to Fundamental
Economy, Industry & Company Analysis, Models


Analysis technique of
of Security Valuation (Cash Flow Model and
Ch 10-15 TB

Security valuation
Dividend Discount Model), Multiple Growth



rates, Dividend Capitalization Approach, Basic



features, patterns and parameters. Ratio



Analysis; Value investing principles





31-32
Technical Analysis
Understanding the significance and limitations of



Technical Analysis. Popular figures and chart
Ch 16-17 TB


patterns (support and resistance level, moving



averages, Price-volume indicators, momentum



indicators) their analysis and interpretation.





33-38
Exposure to Bond
Time Value of Money, Bond Valuation, Analysis


Fundamentals
& management. Bond Strategies, Duration,



Immunization etc.
Ch 18-20 TB




39-41
Derivatives
Introduction to Options, Futures, Forwards,



Option and Futures Pricing.
Ch 21-23 TB






5. Evaluation Scheme:

EC
Components
Duration
Weight age


No.


(%)
Date & Time
Nature of Component
1
Assignment
Class
10


2
Test-I
1 Hour
25
10/9, 10.00--11 AM
OB
3
Test-II
1 Hour
25
22/10, 10.00--11 AM
CB 
4
Comprehensive
3 hrs
40

OB




02/12 AN
CB

6. Chamber Consultation Hour: TBA.

		Notice: All notices pertaining to this course shall be displayed on the Course Management System (CMS) or the Economics and Finance Notice Board. 

		Make-up policy: Make-up will be approved only for students who give a prior (on or before test date) intimation with a genuine reason. 


Instructor-In-Charge
ECON F412/FIN F313.
