
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER  2016-2017
Date: 01.08.2016
Course Handout (Part-II)

In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course

Course No.		: ECON F313
Course Title		: ISSUES IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Instructor-in-Charge: Dr. Sudatta Banerjee

		Course Description:
Income and Growth; Facets of Underdevelopment; Structural Features; contemporary models of development and underdevelopment, poverty, inequality, and development, population and economic development, urbanization and rural-urban migration, education and health in economic development, environment and economic development, trade and economic development, FDI and economic development, infrastructure and economic development; Sustainable development.

		Scope and objective of the course:
Course Rationale:
The course deals with the principal issues of economic development and emphasizes on economy-wide aspects of economic development, with special references to international dimensions of national development policy making.Economic development is treated as a multidimensional concept, thus focusing not only on problems of economic growth and income-poverty reduction, but also on how economic policy can contribute to the improvement of human and social conditions.  Topics include: the way economists' approaches to leading economic development issues have evolved to the present; and leading issues in economic development, including sources of economic growth, the role of population, human capital and innovation, infrastructure development, labour and migration, international trade and foreign aid, and strategies for sustainable economic development.

The basic approach is to present the relevant theory, examine the empirical validity of alternative models and draw out their policy implications.There is also emphasis on the 'Newly Industrializing Countries' and other Third World developing countries. As an integral part of the course, an attempt will be made to train students to collect and interpret data on these economies.


Specific Objectives: 
		Describe the characteristics of and the special challenges facing developing nations.
		To explain students alternative perspectives in economic development theory and how these have policy implications;
		To examine and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of alternative growth and development strategies in light of country experience 
		To explore the knowledge of structural change, dual economies, poverty and income inequality, migration, health and education, agriculture and production, technical and Institutional change, trade, infrastructure, environment and sustainable development
		To give students opportunities to understand and use different growth and development concepts, tools and strategies in analysis and problem solving and to prepare students for doing empirical research in different issues of economic Development. 
The course uses the fundamental concepts of economic growth and development, major theoretical paradigms and debates on growth and development, and policy issues and theoretical knowledge backed up by knowledge of country experiences.

		Text Book: Todaro & Smith (2009): Economic Development, 10/e, Pearson Addison Wesley.
Reference Books:
R1: Meier & Rauch (2012): Leading Issues in Economic Development, 8/e, Oxford University Press.
R2: Banerjee, A. & Roland Benabou & Dlilp Mukherjee (eds): Understanding Poverty, Oxford. University Press.
R3: Agarwala & Singh (eds) (1992): The Economics of Underdevelopment, Oxford University Press.
R4: Griffin, K. (1999) : Alternative Strategies for Economic Development, 2/e, St. martins Press Inc.: New York.
R5: Lynn (2003): Economic Development, Pearson Education.

		Course Plan: 
Lecture
No.
Learning Objective(s)
Topics to be covered
Reference
(Book)
I
Introduction:
1
		Introduction to Economic Growth and Development; Overview of the course, Economic Models
Economic Growth and Development- Introduction:
Scope and Coverage; HDI
Class Notes +TB Ch. 1

2-3
		Diverse structure and classification of countries according to economic and social indicators, an overview of the common development problems faced by many developing countries, few case studies of the developing countries
The structural Diversity of Developing Nations and Characteristics
Ch. 2 of TB
II
Theories and Models of Economic Growth and Development
4-7
		Theories and Models of Economic Growth and Development; Lessons and Controversies
The Growth Game; Historic Growth and contemporary Development; Classical Theories 
Ch. 3 of TB
8-10
		Classic and Contemporary  Theories of Development
Classic Theories of Development; Contemporary Models of Development and Underdevelopment
Ch. 4 of TB 

III
Issues in Economic Development - Domestic
11-14

		Poverty, Inequality and Development 

Evaluate the extent of poverty and inequality in third world countries, growth versus income distribution, benefits of economic growth, policies to reduce income inequalities and poverty; Microfinance 
Ch. 5 of TB

15-16

		Population Growth and Economic Development: Causes, Consequences, and Controversies
Discuss the Size and Growth, Density and Distribution  of Population; causes, consequences and Controversies of Population Growth and Development; Policy Approaches
Ch. 6 of TB

17-18
		Urbanization and Rural-Urban Migration: Theory and Policy
Economic Theory of Rural - Urban Migration
Ch. 7 of TB

10-20
		Human Capital: Education and Health in Economic Development
Human Capital-Concept and Forms; Role in Economic Development; Gender Gaps, Educational Systems and Health Systems and Development; Child labour
Ch. 8 of TB

21
		Gender and Development
		Gender inequality at the start of 21st Century in special context of India
		Missing Women
		Women as Policy Maker
		Gender Sensitive Development measures
Ch. 4.D of R1
22-23
		Agriculture and Development
		Designing an Agricultural Strategy
		Microeconomics of Rural Sector
TB+
Ch. 7 of R1
24-25
		The Environment and Development
Environment and Development; Economic Models of Environment; Policy Options in Developed and Developing Countries.
Ch.10 of TB
IV
Issues in Economic Development  International & Macro
26-33
		How Trade affects Development?
		Trade: Natural Resource Abundance, International Trade and Economic Growth; Import-substitution; Infant Industry Argument
		Terms of Trade and the Prebisch-Singer Thesis
		Foreign Contact and Technology Transfer
Ch. 12 of TB
Ch. 3.A and B of R1
34-36
		Balance of Payments
Balance of payments, Developing-Country Debt, and the macroeconomic Stabilization Controversy
Ch. 14 of TB
37-38
		Foreign Aid and Development
Foreign finance, Investment and Aid: Controversies and Opportunities
Ch. 15 of TB
V
Other Issues in Economic Development 
38-40
		Development Policymaking and the Roles of Market, State, and Civil Society
		Some critical issues for the Twenty-First Century
   
Nature and Rationale for Development Planning; The crisis in Planning; The Market Economy; Development Political economy; theories and Policy Issues; Governance and Reforms
Ch.11 and 16
Class Notes

5. Evaluation Scheme
S. no.
Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date and Time
Remark
1
Test 1
60 mts
20
9/9, 10.00--11 AM
CB
2
Test 2
60 mts 
20
24/10, 10.00--11 AM
OB
3
Project/Presentation
Take home
Class ppt
20


3
Comprehensive Exam
3 hrs
40
03/12 AN
CB

6. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in class
7. Notices: Shall be displayed on LTC notice board and CMS.
8. Make-up policy: Makeup will be given only on Doctors/Wardens recommendation and with prior (at least 01 day before the test/exam) permission of the Instructor-in-Charge/Instructor. Request for make-up made by phone/sms or during/after the test/exam would NOT be entertained at all.

Instructor-in-Charge
ECON F313
