BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE-PILANI HYDERABAD CAMPUS
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2015-16
Course Handout (Part II)
                                                                                                                                                   01/08/2016
In addition to part - I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course. 
Course No.		 : GS F332
Course Title 		 : Contemporary India
Instructor-in-charge      : Arup Maharatna 

Scope and Objective of the Course: In the recent past India has witnessed many socio-economic changes. It would be useful for students to have greater insights into the key factors related to contemporary issues pertaining to trends in political, social, economic and cultural fields in Indian society. The object of the course is thus to acquaint students with the major trends, patterns and paces in the major social, economic, cultural and demographic spheres in the post-independence India. 

2. Text Book:  1) Drze, Jean and Sen, Amartya, An Uncertain Glory: India and Its Contradictions, London: Allen Lane, 2013 (DS); 2) Chandoke, Neera and Praveen Priyadarshi, eds., 2009. Contemporary India: Economy, Society, Politics, New Delhi: Pearson Education.


Reference Books (RB):
Dreze, J. and Sen, A. (2002), India: Development and Participation, New Delhi: Oxford University Press
Kundu, A. (2003), Urbanization and Urban Governance, Economic and Political Weekly July 19, 2003
Bhagat, R Emerging Pattern of Urbanisation in India, Economic and Political Weekly Vol - XLVI No. 34, August 20, 2011;
 Bhagat, R.B. Changing Pattern of Internal Migration in India In: Christophe Z. Guilmoto And Gavin W. Jones Editors (2016) Contemporary Demographic Transformations in China, India and Indonesia, Springer
Motiram, S. and Vakulabharanam (2011), Poverty and Inequality in the Age of Economic Liberalization, In Nachane, D. M (ed): India Development Report 2011, Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Additional references might be suggested during lectures.

4. Course Plan:

No  of Lectures
Learning Objectives 
Topics to be covered
Reference
4
To evaluate Indias growth and development in a comparative perspective
Growth Rates of GDP, Human Development Index and its various components in the post-independence period in comparison with other countries in South Asia and beyond  
DS:Ch.2 and Ch.3.
6
To present an overview of the magnitude of poverty and issues related to social support  
Pre-liberalization and post-liberalization periods, determination of poverty line, public/social policies for poverty eradication  critical evaluation  
DS:Ch.7
6
To present an overview of contemporary Indias educational sector, its performance and challenges
Progress in Literacy Rates, Challenges of Higher Education, Educational Standards, Privileged Excellence, Private Schools and Quality Question   
DS:Ch.5.
6
To evaluate Indias Health Care Sector 
Public Health, Child Health, Immunization, and Nutrition; Various indications of a Health Care Crisis, Lessons from Tamil Nadus experience  
DS:Ch.6
10
To assess the reach and grip of inequality in India 
Income Inequalities, Caste-Based Inequalities, Gender-Based Inequalities  Trends, Implications and Remedies 
DS:Ch.8; Dreze and Sen 2002, Ch. 7.
6
To illuminate Indias urbanization patterns, processes and implications
Urbanization in post-Independence India, trends, spatial patterns, major drivers, urban governance, implications for future  
Bhagat (2011); Bhagat (2016)
4
Indias Democracy, Inequality and Public Reasoning 
Democratic Practices and Functioning of Democratic Institutions, Public Reasoning and Democratic Engagement, Strengths and Limits of Indian Media  
DS:Ch.9





5. Evaluation Scheme:

Evaluation Component
Weightage (%)
Duration
Nature of Component
Date & Time
Test 1
20
1 Hour
CB
13/9, 1.00--2.00 PM
Test 2
20
1 Hour
CB
21/10, 1.00--2.00 PM
Assignment 
20

OB

Comprehensive Exam
40
3 Hours
CB
08/12 FN

6.   Chamber Consultation Hour: Room D 214 (Time would be announced in class) 
7.   Course Notices: Notices, if any, concerning the course will be displayed on the LTC Notice Board and  
      CMS Website.
8.  Makeup: The make-up for an evaluation component will be given only in genuine cases. 
































