
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI-HYDERABAD CAMPUS
INSTRUCTION DIVISION, FIRST SEMESTER 2015-2016
COURSE HANDOUT (Part II)
14-05-2016
In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.
Course Number	:	BITS F113
Course Title		:	General Mathematics I 
Instructor-In charge	:           Dr. K V S Shiv Chaitanya

Scopes and objective of the course:  
This Course deals with intermediate mathematics needed for Pharmacy students.   Course covers set theory, Functions, Coordinate geometry, basic algebra & theory of equations, permutations and combinations, Binomial theorem, Trigonometry, One Dimensional Calculus: Limit and continuity, Differentiation, Integration, Application of derivatives and definite integration.

Text Books:
Mathematics for Class XI  : Text book for  CBSE  national council of educational research and training .
Mathematics for Class XII  part I :  Text book for  CBSE   national council of educational research and training .
Mathematics for Class XII part II  :  Text book for  CBSE   national council of educational research and training 
3 Reference books : 
Thomas  Finney  : Calculus  & analytic geometry    12th edition  Pearson 
Stewart  :  Calculus  early transcendentals  5e  2003   thomson .
Lectures  of   Prof M Ganesh on review of elementary  Calculus for the Course  Engineering  Math.
Lecture Plan:
Lect No.
Topic
Article
1-2
Sets, operation on sets, finite and infinite set, power set, Cartesian product, relations and functions
Chapter  I  &II of  text book I
3-6
Trigonometric functions and their identies, simple trigonometric equations, trigonometric functions of sum and differences of two angles, inverse trigonometric functions
Chapter III of text book I , Chapter II text book 2
7-8
Complex numbers and quadratic equations
Chap. V article 1-4 & 6
9-10
Permutations & Combinations
Chap.VII of text book I
11-12
Binomial theorem for positive integer power
Chapter VIII of  text book I
13-14
Arithmetic progression, geometric progression, Arithmetic mean , geometric mean ,infinite series , infinite geometric series ,exponential and logarithmic series
Chap. IX&  appendix 1  of  text book 1
15-17
Condition for parallelism and perpendicularity of two lines  , angle between lines Equations of line in various forms(slope,  intercept, through given two points, slope point, general)      distance of a point from a line
Chapter X  of  text book I
18-21
Conic sections, eccentricity, latus rectum, Locus, circle, parabola, hyperbola, ellipse, pair of lines.
Chapter XI  of  text book I
22-24
Three dimensional geometry (distance, equations of line and plane in space, distance of a point from plane, equation of sphere)
Chap. XII of text book 1 & Chap. XI of text book 3
25-35
Limits , continuity ,  differentiability , higher order derivatives , Chain rule Logarithmic differentiation, mean value theorem, Rolles theorem,  Applications of derivatives to rates, slope of tangents, maxima and minima, indeterminate forms
Chap .XIII textbook 1.Chap. V  & VI text book 2
36-42
Concept of anti derivatives and indefinite integrals, Methods of substitution, parts, partial fractions, trigonometric reduction formulas, fundamental theorem of calculus, Definite integrals, area under curve
Chapter VII & VIII of text book 3

Evaluation Scheme:

EC No.
Evaluation Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date & Time
Nature of Component
1.
Test I
60 min
20
08/09 & 10-11 AM
Closed Book
2.
Test II
60 min
20
25/10 & 10-11 AM
Closed book
3.
TH
-
20

Open Book
4.
Compre. Exam.
3 Hours
40
02/12 & FN
Closed Book

6 Announcements: All announcements in relation to the above course will be put up on the Physics Dept NB 
7. Make up policy: Make up for the mid-semester/comprehensive examination will be given to genuine cases.
8. Chamber consultation hours: To be announced in the class.
Instructor In-Charge
    	       BITS   F113














