

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI, Hyderabad Campus
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017
COURSE HANDOUT (PART-II)
                                                                                                                                Date: 01/08/2016
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.			:  MATH   F312
Course Title                           :  Ordinary Differential Equations
Instructor-In-Charge          	:  Dr. T S L Radhika

SCOPE & OBJECTIVE:

Ordinary Differential Equations frequently occurs as mathematical models in many branches of
science, engineering and economy. For a mathematician confronted with such a model there are
a number of issues to address and various approaches to choose from:
 Is the problem well-posed? Do you expect the differential equation to have a solution? If so,
is there a unique solution satisfying the given initial or boundary conditions?
Can you find an explicit, analytical solution? This is only possible in rare circumstances.
Geometric or qualitative methods: These methods give insights into general, qualitative
features of solutions and do not require solving the differential equation.
 Stability and dependence on parameters: Having obtained a solution by any method, we
would like to know how the solution changes if we change the initial data by a small amount
(stability analysis) and if we change parameters in the differential equation (parameter
dependence). Course helps deeper understanding of the complicated models that are there in the real life.
TEXT BOOK:

S Ahmad &  M R M Rao  :  Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications in Biology and Engineering, East West Press, 1999.

REFERENCE BOOKS:

R1.   The qualitative theory of ordinary differential equations, an introduction, Fred Brauner and John A Nohel, Dover Publications. 
R2.  Stability theory of differential equations, Richard Bellman, Dover publicationsR3. Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations, E.A. Coddington & N. Levinson,  Tata McGraw- Hill
R4. Differential equations and dynamical systems- Lawrence Perko, Springer

COURSE PLAN:
Lecture No.
Learning objectives
Topics to be covered
Chapter in the Text Book
1-2
Know the basic definitions and notations 
Introduction & Overview of the course Notation and Definitions
Ch. 1 section  1 &2
3 -8
Learn the existence and uniqueness theorems for scalar equations and for a general system of equations
Existence and Uniqueness of Solutions of Scalar Differential Equations, Existence Theorems for system of equations, Differential & Integral Inequalities
Ch.1 Section: 3  5
9 -16

Understand the properties of linear systems 
Introduction to Linear Systems, FSS, Properties of Linear Homogeneous Systems, Inhomogeneous Linear Systems
Ch.2  Section: 1  3

17 -21

Learn how to find the behavior of linear equations of higher order 
Behavior of Solutions of nth order Linear Homogeneous Equations, Asymptotic Behavior 
Ch.2  Section: 4  5

22 - 24
Understand the concept of stability of a linear system
Introduction to stability, Continuous dependence and stability properties of Solutions
Ch.3  Section: 1  2

25 -33
Learn the stability analysis of weakly non-linear and 2-D systems 
Linear Systems, Weakly Non linear Systems, Two Dimensional Systems
Ch.3  Section: 3  5

   34 -38
Learn the Liapunovs method for  stability analysis
Introduction to stability by Liapunovs second Method, Autonomous systems, Non Autonomous Systems
Ch.5  Section: 1  3

39-42
Understanding more about the behavior of solutions of second order equations
Second  order differential equations  boundedness of solutions 
Oscillatory equations,  Classical equations
Ch.4  section  1-5

EVALUATION SCHEME: 

Component
Duration
Weightage (%)
Date & Time
Nature of the component
1
Test-I
20
13/9, 10.00--11 AM
Closed book
2
Test-II
20
21/10, 10.00--11 AM
Open book
3
Assignments 
20

Open book/ Take Home
4
Compre
40
14/12 AN
Closed book

CHAMBER CONSULTATION HOUR:  Will be announced in the class.
NOTICES: All notices regarding MATH F312 will be put on CMS.
MAKE-UP Policy: 
(i) NO MAKE UP will be given in Assignment components under any circumstances. 
(ii) Make up of other evaluation components will be granted only in genuine cases.  Permission must be taken in advance except in extreme cases. 
      (iii) No MAKE-MAKE-UP will be entertained.

                                                                                                         
                                                                                                Instructorin-charge
                                                                                         			     MATH  F312
