BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
First Semester 2016-2017
01-Aug-2016
COURSE HANDOUT (PART II)

In addition to partI (General Handout for all courses) printed on page 1 of the timetable book, this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course Number	:  BIO F214
Course Title		:  INTEGRATIVE Biology
Instructor-in-Charge	:  JAYATI RAY DUTTA
Other Instructors	:  JAYATI RAY DUTTA


1. Course Description:
The course intends to bridge the gap as well as opens new vistas to students taking up biology. The course covers two tracks, essentially. The first track introduces the student to the ordering that helps biologists to actually study the vast diversity of the living world. This track would encompass questions related to the origin and evolutionary pathways followed in nature, as well as the methods followed by biologists to systematically categorize and document them. The second track highlights the uses and applications of biology in everyday life  whether in the economic or in the social realms. Together, the course projects the subject in a way from which the student can choose and implement his biological knowledge vis--vis his/her interests.

2. Scope and Objectives:
Being the second course on general biology, the course exposes the students to those foundational aspects as described above. At the end of the course, the student will have developed a basic understanding of the evolutionary processes, rationale for taxonomic arrangements and familiarity of selected, representative members of the major kingdoms of living organisms. Further, the student will also become aware of how knowledge of biology is applied for creating opportunities for livelihood.

3. Textbook:	
Raven P.H. and George B. Johnson. Systematics and Evolutionary Biology (BITS-Pilani Custom Edition 2012). New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 2012.

4. Reference Books:
RB1: Campbell, N.A., et. al. Essential Biology with Physiology (2nd edition). New Delhi: Pearson Education Inc., 2009.
RB2: Starr, Cecie. Biology: Concepts and Applications (6th edition). India: Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2007.


5. Lecture Plan:		
Lect. No.
Learning Objectives
Topics to be covered
Chap. No.
1-3
Genes within populations
Genetic variation and evolution, Hardy-Weinberg principle; agents of evolutionary change; fitness; interaction among evolutionary forces; maintenance of variation; selection acting on traits; experimental studies on natural selection; limits of selection
20
4-7
Evidence for evolution
Evidence of natural selection; artificial selection; fossil and anatomical evidence for evolution; convergent evolution; Darwin's critics
21
8-10
Origin of species
The nature of species; the biological species concept; reproductive isolation; genetic drift and natural selection in speciation; geography of speciation; species clusters; pace of evolution; speciation and extinction
22
11-14
Systematics and the phylogenetic revolution
Systematics; cladistics; systematics and classification; phylogenetics and comparative biology; phylogenetics and disease evolution
23
15-16
Genome evolution
Comparative genomics; evolution of whole genomes
24
17-19
Protists
Introduction to protists; origin and endosymbiosis; economic importance of, and diseases associated with protists
29
20-23
Green plants
Introduction to green algae, bryophytes, tracheophytes, lycophytes, pteridophytes and angiosperms; evolution of seed plants and their economic importance
30
24-26
Fungi
Introduction to fungi; ecology, fungal parasites and pathogens; economic importance of fungi
31
27-29
Overview of Animal Diversity
General features of animals; evolution of the animal body plan; the classification of animals
32
30-35
Noncoelomate and Coelomate invertebrates
Some important features of noncoelomate and specific features of coelomate invertebrates
33,34
36-42
Vertebrates
Description of characteristics of fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals; evolution of the primates
35


6. Evaluation Scheme:
No.
Evaluation component
Duration
Weight
Date and Time
Remarks
1
Test I
60 min.
20%
10/9, 4.00--5.00 PM
CB
2
Test II
60 min.
20%
22/10, 4.00--5.00 PM
CB
3
Presentations

20%

OB
4
Comprehensive Examination
180 min.
40%
01/12 AN
CB

Chamber consultation hour: To be announced in the class.
Notices: All notices will be displayed on the Biological Sciences Group notice board.
Make-up policy: Make-up decisions will be made on a case-by-case basis and only genuine cases as determined by the team and validated by Wardens and/or Medical Officer will be considered. No make-up for Lab component and Quizzes. 








Instructor-in-Charge
                                                                                                                            BIO F214
