BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI

INSTRUCTION DIVISION

FIRST SEMESTER 2016-2017

Course Handout Part II

Date:01/08/2016

In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives

further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : ME F312

Course Title : Advanced Mechanics of Solids

Instructor-in-charge : Dr.G.R.Sabareesh

Instructor

: Dr.G.R.Sabareesh, Mr.KarthikTeja

Bulletin wise contents: Generalized Hooke's law; Energy methods; Torsionof non-circular

members; Shear center and Asymmetrical bending; Curved beams; Thick cylinders; Plates and

shells; Contact stress.

1. Scope and Objective of the Course:

The course deals with analysis of some advanced topics in Mechanics of Solids, beyond what

is covered in the basic course of Mechanics of SolidsME F 211.

2. Course Description:

The course work starts with Generalized Hooke's law and Three Dimensional Stress Strain

Relations. Then a detailed discussion of energy methods for solving indeterminate problems is

included. Theory related to non-circular members subjected to torsion is treated. Theories of

Asymmetrical Bending, Shear Centre, Curved Beams and Thick Cylinders are dealt with in

later chapters. A chapter with a brief study on Contact Stressis also included.

3. Text books:

T1: "Advanced Mechanics of Materials" - Arthur P., Boresi and R.J. Schmidt, John Wiley, 6th Edition, 2003.

Reference books: R1: "Advanced Mechanics& Solids" - L.S. Srinath, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. 2nd Edition, 2003

R2: "Advanced Mechanics of Solids" - Otto T. Bruhns, Springer Verlag, 2003 R3: "Advanced Mechanics of Materials" - R. Davis Cook and Warren C. Young, Prentice Hall 2nd

Edition, 1998.

4. Course Plan

Lect. No. 1&2
3 to 6 7 to 10

Learning Objectives
Review of elementary Mechanics of Materials and methods of analysis, failure analysis & properties of material
Three dimensional stress strain relations and tensor representation. Generalized Hooke's law. Hook's law for Anisotropic elasticity, Isotropic elasticity and Orthotropic materials Principle of potential energy, Castigliano's theorem, Deflections in statically determinate structures and statically indeterminate structures, applications to curved

Topics to be Coursed
Introduction & review of elementary mechanics of solids Theories of stress strain & Generalized Hooke's Law Energy methods and applications

Chap/Sec CH1(TB)
CH2 (TB) & CH3 (TB) CH5 (TB)

Lect. No. Learning Objectives

Topics to be Chap/Sec

Coursed

beam treated as straight beams.

11 to 16 Torsion of Prismatic bar of circular cross section, Non-circular CH6 (TB)

Example problems, Saint-Venant's Seminiverse method, members

Linear Elastic solutions, Torsion of Rectangular cross subjected to

section members, hollow thin wall torsion members, torsion

Numerical solution of torsion problems

17 to 20 Non-symmetrical loading bending and deflection of Asymmetrical CH7 (TB)

straight beams. Deflections in standard channel sections bending

21 to 25 Shear in Thin walled beams, Shear flow in thin-walled Shear Centre CH8 (TB)

beam cross sections,Shear center for channel sections and

Shear center for composite beams.

26 to 32 Location of neutral axis, radial stress, correction of Curved beams CH9 (TB)

circumferential stress and deflections of curved beams.

Curved beams of standard sections: I & T. Analysis of

statically indeterminate curved beams (closed ring).

33 to 38 Stress - Stain - Temperature relation for thick walled Thick walled CH11(TB)

cylinders and composite cylinders. Analysis of open and cylinders

closed cylinders

39 to 42 Geometry of contact surface, methods of computing Contact stress CH17(TB)

contact stress, deflection of bodies in point contact and

line contact with normal load.

5. Evaluation Scheme:

EC Evaluation Component Duratio Weightage Date & time

Nature of

No n (min.) (%)

component

1 Test - 1

60 15

8/9, 8.30-9.30 AM

CB

2 Test - 2

60 15

25/10, 8.30-9.30 AM

CB

3 *Tutorial tests

10 15

Tutorial hour as announced in Timetable(CB)

4 Home Assignments/Term paper

20

OB

5 Comprehensive Exam

180 35

12/12 AN

CB

* Surprise tutorial tests of 10 minutes duration each will be conducted during the tutorials or

regular classes and these will be evaluated for ten marks each.

6. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

7. Notices:All the notices will be displayed in CMS or Mechanical Engineering notice board only.

Besides this, students are advised to visit regularly CMS (institute's web based course

management system) for latest updates.

8. Make-up policy:Make-up shall be given only to the genuine cases with prior intimation. No makeup is allowed for tutorial surprise tests.

ME F312

Dr.G.R.Sabareesh

